[Music]
most 3d character-driven videogames can
be pretty easily placed into one of two
categories either first person or third
person in a first person game you see
the game world through the actual eyes
of the player character as though you
were that character and in a third
person game you see the player character
from the outside often from behind their
back or from a fixed isometric
perspective but the existence of these
two perspectives begs a question if this
is what a first-person game looks like
and this is what a third-person video
game looks like what exactly what second
person look like now I'm not the first
person to wonder about this the question
of whether or not a second person
shooter could actually exist is one that
is plagued videogame messageboards just
about as long as the internet has
existed it's also served as the premise
for some pretty good comedy sketches
over the years like this one from Mega
64 and this one from the onion to inter
second person shooter mode you just
simply put just a narrative slider from
first a second you are walking down a
long corridor suddenly a Nazi leaps help
them around a doorway and unleashes a
hail of machine gunfire in your
direction but to help us actually figure
out what a second person would really be
I think it would be helpful to look at
this grammatically in written language
the term first-person denotes any
writing where the point of view uses
phrases like I or my to tell a story
from the perspective of the protagonist
third-person writing on the other hand
uses third-person pronouns for example
he went this way she went that way etc
to talk about characters from an outside
perspective now second person writing
does exist but it's kind of a weird one
in second person the primary pronoun
used is you you do this you go there etc
the second person is actually a lot less
common in narrative writing and is
actually something you're more likely to
encounter in say a list of instructions
or a choose your own adventure book now
the analogous video game camera
perspectives for first and third person
writing are obvious but what about for
second person we know what an eye game
looks like and we know what a key game
looks like but what about a you game
strangely enough I actually found the
answer to this before I even came up
with a question and
or not it came to me courtesy of a game
you may have heard me talk about once
before and that game is driver San
Francisco c4 all the interesting
missions in driver San Francisco and
there are plenty of them there's one
mission in particular that I swear to
God I think about all the time the
mission in question is called the target
and it's the final mission of chapter
six of the game in the game you play is
a cop named John Tanner who for reasons
I won't get into here basically has a
superpower that allows you to take over
the bodies of any other driver in his
begun using that superpower to foil a
possible terror plot from a gangster
named Jericho over the course of the
game Tanner decides that the best way to
unravel Jericho's plans is to do it from
the inside and in order to do that
Tanner takes over the body of a
low-level henchman named ordell and uses
his driving skills to help move ordell
up the ranks the final mission in this
story arc sees you inhabited or Adele's
body one last time to complete a major
assignment from his boss Layla who is
this international assassin in Jericho's
second-in-command Tanner's plan warped
into ordell's body and without arousing
suspicion drive Layla and ordell
directly into police custody now the
mission begins as normal with Tanner and
his partner Jones driving their iconic
orange Dodge Challenger and soon enough
you warp into ordell's body with Layla
in the passenger seat where she gives
you some clarity on your mission or tell
I need nothing but your best today
what's going down
Jericho has got a problem he wants fixed
get me to the target and I'll fix it so
you drive to the destination she's
giving you closing out on your target
and as you get close this happens
[Music]
slow down
we should acquire the target anytime now
the yellow dodge up ahead stay close but
don't be obvious that's my car what
that's the cop that's been getting in
our way do we follow him to the target
he is the target it's you you've been
assigned to kill you
now after that cutscene ends you are
backing or Del's body in the first
person with Leila sitting to your right
but then you press the throttle to
accelerate and the car in front of you
moves you steer to the left and to the
right and the car in front of you moves
to the left and then to the right and
then quickly it sinks in that the car
you're controlling is actually the car
you're following your perspective as the
player is entirely separate from what
you're controlling is the player in
other words you're pursuing you now as
you can see the car that you're sitting
in is moving too but crucially you're
not the one who's controlling that car
the car you're sitting in is moving
automatically seemingly operated by an
AI controlled driver who's tailing the
car you're actually controlling it's
basically like a chase mission in any
other video game just like you've seen
countless other times except for this
time it's flipped on its head this time
you're the one being followed while
simultaneously seeing it all unfold from
the perspective of the car doing the
following and well it's hard for you to
guess how well this comes across on
video all these elements combine to make
something that is very very odd to play
there's something shocking and
disorienting about seeing a first-person
perspective on your screen but also not
controlling that perspective while
remotely operating the car that you're
tailing it's the closest video game has
ever gotten to feeling like a true
out-of-body experience and it's an
experience that has stuck with me ever
since I first played this game back in
2011 now when I first played driver San
Francisco eight years ago I kind of just
played through this mission once start
to finish marveling at the unique
perspective that this mission granted
you but then moving on with the rest of
the game but I've always felt like if I
ever came back to this game I'd want to
pick this mission apart and see what
makes it tick and that's part of what I
hope to accomplish with this video see
as cool as this mission is it's also
pretty linear the whole thing takes
place with you driving down this
completely locked down race course with
no exits or detours pretty much just a
straight shot to the exit I've always
assumed that the developer reflexions
designed the mission this way due to the
technological limitations of this weird
second person camera the
they built just for this mission perhaps
there was no way for them to get this
camera to behave properly in the actual
open world with all the various streets
elevations and alleyways you could dip
into not to mention the other Street
traffic and on top of that they built
this mission with a pretty strict
countdown timer forcing you to hit the
checkpoints in rapid succession
something that I always assumed was
placed there to keep you from ever
veering too far off the path and
breaking the game somehow still I've
always wondered about the actual
limitations of this mission and I knew
that this time around I wanted to test
out whether or not there was any way to
escape
so before finishing the mission I paused
started it over and then this time
instead of starting the race as intended
I swung the car into a 180 driving the
car backwards in the wrong direction now
when I do this the AI driver immediately
begins panicking rapidly spinning the
steering wheel trying desperately to
keep my car visible in frame and then
eventually it turns around 180 degrees
to reveal what looks like the entire
open world of driver San Francisco
seemingly 100% accessible to the player
now I drove away from the racetrack and
began exploring and I kept bracing
myself to hit some kind of invisible
wall or failure State for going off
course but it never happened it all
actually worked I emerged into traffic
and the second person camera followed me
immaculately bobbing and weaving through
the other cars on the road it was around
this time that I noticed there was no
timer it turns out that reflections had
generously designed this mission
intentionally or unintentionally so that
the mission countdown timer doesn't
actually begin until you reach the first
checkpoint meaning that if you never hit
that first checkpoint you can drive
around forever
[Music]
this led to what I can only describe is
a transcendent video game experience it
felt like I was seeing something that I
was never meant to see this ability to
explore the city as much as I wanted to
all from this wholly unique extremely
surreal second person viewpoint it felt
like a magical experience and one that
almost nobody else has experienced for
themselves
now revisiting this mission and managing
to escape the confines laid down by the
developers all those years ago
I really wanted to try and push this
thing to its limits
I couldn't resist trying to break things
a little I drove the car off ramps into
oncoming traffic all of it but
surprisingly it held together perfectly
that is until I tried one specific thing
see I haven't talked about it before but
this mission actually does have a
failure condition in the lower right
corner of the screen there's a health
meter and it represents the health of
Tanner's car the car you're chasing /
driving but if you get into one too many
collisions while driving this car in the
second person you can actually run out
of health causing Tanner to die and the
mission to end in a loss this is
actually pretty hard to achieve on the
default mission path they laid out but
driving into oncoming lanes of traffic
and ramping off car transporters had
taken its toll on my vehicle and I only
had a small sliver of health left
wanting to explore this mission as long
as possible I generally pulled Tanner's
car into a narrow alleyway and then
decided to try out leave one thing I
hadn't attempted yet I turned around and
drove the car in the second person
directly at myself
this put the AI driver in a weird
position it now had to drive backwards
just to keep me in the frame and it was
also narrowly sandwiched between the two
walls of the alley giving it almost no
room to maneuver I kept driving towards
myself putting on the pressure closer
and closer and then nice [__] it broke
all at once the second person vehicle
shoots into a wall clips through it and
then launches hundreds of feet into the
air briefly one frame at the time we can
get glimpses of the chaos that unfolded
we see the car inside the wall then we
see the car's front console flipped over
we see what appears to be the ocean
floor and then the pavement has seen
from underneath we see rooftops the
driver's arm the sky trees abstract
geometry and then the city from above
flooded with unloaded geometry after
that we see the car spinning and
spinning in midair giving us glimpses of
San Francisco from above before finally
getting so high that nothing can be seen
but endless ocean and then black
[Music]
suddenly all at once the car snaps back
to earth the health meter for Tanner's
vehicle turns blindingly white and then
the second person viewpoint fills with
an orange yellow hue Tanner's car
quickly it becomes clear that the second
person car has somehow spawned inside of
Tanner's vehicle dealing infinite damage
to the car a deafening crash sound can
be heard and shattered glass flies
everywhere and then for a brief moment
right before the mission ends the camera
inexplicably shifts into Tanner's car
where the car is balanced on its nose
its windshield shattered thrust
impossibly through another vehicle and
then horrific ly the camera clips
through the back of Tanner's partner's
head and shows us the back side of his
eyeballs and tongue a truly terrifying
2nd person perspective if ever there was
one
[Music]
shaken by my otherworldly encounter
seemingly brought on by pushing this
already existential mission to its
limits
I reset the mission and played beginning
to end one last time this time careful
to do it the right way not wanting to
disturb whatever eldritch of being I had
upset by breaking the mission in the
first place after all I thought I know
that every mission in driver San
Francisco ends with a continue and retry
option so if I really wanted to explore
this mission again I could always hit
the retry button to give it another shot
after running through it normally so I
proceeded to complete the mission as
intended a mission by the way that ends
with the antagonist Jericho actually
taking over your body and attempting to
drive you into a lethal car accident
Jericho sit back and enjoy the show
not many people get to watch themselves
time a problem that Tanner decides to
solve by disturbingly enough shifting
for the first and only time in the game
into his partner Jones's body yes that
partner anyways I go to finish the
mission in the normal way staying on the
path fully expecting the restart option
that appears after most missions to show
up instead I get to the end of the
mission and for some reason that I still
can't explain the only option was
continued the reset option had vanished
panicked I quickly hit alt f4 and exited
the game hoping I could load up my save
file and play through the mission again
but it was too late and it already auto
saved over my file and the mission was
gone with no way to reply it again
look try for San Francisco is a game
full of weird interesting strikingly
designed missions but to me the target
has always stood out as the perfect
example of what makes this game special
video games are an entire medium built
around taking over others bodies and
Driver San Francisco is a richly
existential and metatextual reflection
of this idea this mission in particular
brought these ideas to the fore in a way
that I wasn't fully prepared for and
that I'm only now beginning to wrap my
head around years and years later even
writing the script for this video felt
like a mind-bending exercise in trying
to explain something that is borderline
unexplainable you really have to play it
for yourself to get a full sense of how
crazy this mission feels in designing
this mission reflections took decades of
3d video game conventions and turn them
on their head to create what feels like
a truly out-of-body experience that to
me is an accomplishment worth
celebrating please play a driver San
Francisco here who's in your body well
no one God alright so a couple quick
updates on the driver San Francisco
situation um the petition to get newbie
stuff to relist the game that I
mentioned at the end of my last video is
now at over 70,000 signatures which is
insane please if you have any interest
in this game please sign this petition
it now feels like 100,000 is within our
grasp which is crazy and I can't believe
I'm saying but it could happen it which
to me feels like a nun ignore balumbo
but in the meantime as you might have
noticed Ubisoft has not really stood the
game they have been ignoring the 70,000
signatures we have and on a totally
unrelated note not connected at all
Driver San Francisco since my video last
month has been in the top 10 most
downloaded games on the Pirate Bay
totally no relationship there not
mentioning that for any reason at all
just saying the game is not available
and it's also one of the most pirated
video games and has been in the top ten
with pirated games for the past month
just the coincidence also totally
unrelated to the fact that this game is
apparently very popular on the Pirate
Bay um did you know that if you go to
Nord VPN org slash Babylonian you can go
to websites illicit or non illicit
without being tracked by your ISP or
anybody else so that means that for
example if you were to go to and I'm not
saying you should a website that allowed
you to download a video game that is no
longer available and can be easily
pirated with just a few clicks then you
don't want to get an angry email from
your ISP saying you can't do that um you
should invest in a VPN um if you go to
Nord bpn org slash Babylonia and use
coupon code Babylonian to get 70% off
their three-year plan and get one full
month of VPN coverage free but have you
enjoyed this video please share it with
anyone you think would like it and or
subscribe to my channel if you'd like to
see more stuff like this in the future
I've got a lot of videos in various
stages of production right now that I'm
really excited to get out into the world
and I can finally start thinking about
them now that this one's done so yeah
that's it for me for this time hopefully
the next video comes out a little
quicker I got a lot of ideas that have
nothing to do with driver SF I just this
one has been on my mind for a while and
I'm glad to finally have it done so
thank you for watching and I'll see you
next time
[Music]
you